Problem  Set 2: Probability  Models  and their  Applications  in Public  Health  
(with  R) 
 
Instructions:  This problem  set consists  of one problem. Please submit  your work  as a write -up 
of responses  to the following  steps  and questions. Please include  your name  and lecture section  
on the upper  right -hand  corner  of your first page . 

 
 
Problem  1. Vitamin  A Supplementation to Prevent  Children’s  Mortality  in Nepal  
Scientific  Background : 
 
Xerophthalmia, due to vitamin  A deficiency,  was long known to be a leading  cause of childhood 
blindness  in the developing world. However,  in the late 1970s, past-Dean  Alfred  Sommer  (then 
an assistant  professor  of ophthalmology)  and his Indonesian colleagues  observed  that children 
with mild,  non-blinding xerophthalmia  (those  having night  blindness  or Bitot’s  spots, which  are 
dry patches  that form  on the conjunctiva)  were at a 4-fold higher  risk of dying than children  with 
normal  eyes.  This finding, coupled with knowledge  that adequate vitamin  A status  can improve  
resistance to infection, suggested  that vitamin  A deficiency  could also be a cause of preschool  
child  mortality.  Hopkins  investigators  subsequently showed in large trials  in Indonesia  (with 
over 28,000 children)  and Nepal  (with  over 25,000 children)  that, in fact, dosing young children 
every  4-6 months  with high- potency vitamin  A could  reduce  child  mortality  by approximately 
30%, findings  that have  since been  replicated  by other  investigators  in Asia and Africa.  In this 
project,  you will work  with some  of the original  data from  this community  trial carried  out in 
Nepal.  

Original References  (optional) : 
 
Sommer  A, Tarwotjo  I, Djunaedi E, West  KP Jr, Loeden  AA, Tilden  R, Mele L and the Aceh 
Study Group. Impact  of vitamin  A supplementation on childhood mortality: A randomized 
controlled community  trial. Lancet  1986;1:1169. 
 
West  KP Jr, Pokhrel RP, Katz J, LeClerq  SC, Khatry  SK, Shrestha SR, Pradhan  EK, Tielsch  JM, 
Pandey  MR, Sommer  A. Efficacy  of vitamin  A in reducing preschool child  mortality  in Nepal. 
Lancet  1991;338:67. 
 
Methods : 
 
i. The Nepal  data set is located  in the csv data file named  nepal621.csv . Refer  to 
your Class  Dataset  Code Book for the file format.  Load  the tidyverse with:  
library(tidyverse) Open  the data set and name it nepal621. Construct a 2x2 
contingency table  of treatment  (placebo  or Vitamin  A) against  status  (alive  or dead)  at 
sixteen  months of follow-up. Calculate the rate of child  mortality  in Nepal  for children 
receiving  placebo; Vitamin  A. Summarize  the difference in mortality  in a sentence  as if 
for a journal. 
 
CT = table(nepal621$trt,  nepal621$status)  
addmargins(CT)  
prop.table(CT,  margin=1) 
 
ii. a) For a randomly chosen  child  from  the study population, calculate the following 
probabilities  from  the 2x2 contingency table you constructed above.  
 
Marginal Probabilities  
 
Pr(VitA)  Pr(Died)  
 
Joint Probabilities  
 
Pr(Died  and VitA)  Pr(Died  and Placebo)  
 
Conditional Probabilities  
  ) VitAPr() VitAand Died Pr() VitA| DiedPr( =  
 
  Placebo)  |   Pr(Died  
 
 
ii. b) By hand, use Bayes’  Theorem  and the 2x2 contingency table  to calculate the probability  
that a child  that died received  Vitamin  A. Use the observed rates  for each term below to 
see how the calculations  work. 

Pr(Died)Pr(VitA) VitA)| Pr(Died
Pr(Died)Died) and Pr(VitA) Died| VitAPr(⋅= =  
 
) Pr(Placebo Placebo)| Pr(Died Pr(VitA) VitA)| Pr(DiedPr(VitA) VitA)| Pr(Died
⋅ + ⋅=  
 
iii. For each treatment group, construct the 2x2 contingency table  of sex (girls or boys)  
versus vital status  (alive  or dead).  From these tables, calculate the overall probability of 
dying for boys and girls (sex defined at birth) separately by treatment group. Describe 
in a sentence as if for a journal the relationship  between  mortality  and treatment.  Does  
the effect  of treatment  appear  to vary by sex? If so, we say: “sex is an effect  modifier,” 
or “sex modifies  the effect  of vitamin  A on mortality”  or there is an “interaction”  of sex 
and treatment  in causing  mortality.  Write  another sentence or two describing differences  
in the treatment  effect  between  boys and girls.  Be quantitative  and use the term “effect  
modif ication.” 
 
nepal.plac = filter(nepal621,  trt=="Placebo")  
nepal.vit  = filter(nepal621,  trt=="Vit  A") 
 
CT = table(nepal.plac$sex, nepal.plac$status)  
addmargins(CT)  
prop.table(CT,  margin=1) 
 
CT = table(nepal.vit$sex,  nepal.vit$status)  
addmargins(CT)  
prop.table(CT,  margin=1) 
 
iv. Summarize  in a table  and/or figure  the evidence  (data)  relevant  to the null hypotheses  
that: 
(1) Vitamin  A supplementation  has no effect  on mortality  in Nepali  pre-school  children;  
and 
(2) The treatment effect  is the same for both boys and girls (i.e., “not modified  by sex”).  
 
 
v. Consider a family  with  3 boys and  2 girls who received  placebo.  Suppose that each  
child’s survival is independent of all the other children  in the family . Calculate the  
probability that 0, 1, 2 or 3 boys die during the study  follow- up. 
 
Use the applet:  http://homepage.stat.uiowa.edu/~mbognar/applets/bin.html  
 
vi. Use the Poisson approximation to the binomial distribution  to recalculate probabilities  of 
0, 1, 2 or 3 boys dying in  problem v. 

Use the applet:  http://homepage.stat.uiowa.edu/~mbognar/applets/pois.html  


vii. For each treatment group, construct the 2x2 contingency table of age (<1, 1 -2, 3-4) versus 
vital status (alive or dead). Consider a family with triplets who are 18 months old, on 
treatment: J, K, and L.  
  
a) What is the probability that J and K live and L dies?     
b) Does this differ from the probability that one of the three children dies? Why or why not?  
 
 

